So in this lecture,
I will discuss how one
might want to think about
cryptocurrencies possible place
in an optimal portfolio.
So in the introduction,
I laid out two traditional
finance views.
One was more theoretical,
one empirical.
The theoretical view
is very simple,
and corresponds to some
of the quotes that I
mentioned at the beginning
of this set of lectures.
Because cryptocurrency
has no intrinsic value
and pays no dividends,
it should not be part of
the optimal portfolio period.
Here, I'm going to develop
the empirical view.
So in Lecture 2,
we saw that cryptocurrency
has high average returns.
However, we saw that
the standard deviation on
those returns is also very high.
We found that returns
are positively skewed.
Now another fact about
cryptocurrency is
that they have
relatively low Betas.
So now we're going to use
these statistical results
and combine them with
the portfolio theory to think
about crypto as an asset class.
So one way to adjust
for the risk of
the portfolio is to use
something called
the Sharpe ratio,
which is something that I
introduced in the last lecture.
It's named for Bill Sharpe,
the Nobel Prize winning
economist and
inventor of the CAPM.
Now, the Sharpe ratio
is the slope of
the capital allocation line.
So what does that mean?
Well, is the expected return
minus the risk-free rate divided
by the standard
deviation of return.
What it does is it tells you
the extra return you receive
for the asset per unit
of standard deviation.
So it's telling you how good is
the risk return trade
off of this asset.
So now we're going to
use the statistics
that I showed you last time to
compute the Sharpe ratio on
the three major cryptocurrencies.
Now, because these
are daily returns,
and because the interest rate
is basically zero anyway,
we will use a risk-free
rate of zero.
Thus, we'll compute
the expected return
divided by the
standard deviation.
Now recall that these returns
tell you a percent gain on
a strategy that exchanges
dollars for cryptocurrency,
and then converts this
cryptocurrency back to dollar.
It does assume no trading costs.
Now, it's going to
use average returns.
So on most days,
you will lose money perhaps
even if the Sharpe ratio
is positive,
and then a big worry
is the survivor bias.
We are looking at the three best
cryptocurrencies.
Just by definition, they're
going to represent the ones
that have ex-post,
the highest returns.
Okay. So with all
of those caveats,
let's look at some Sharpe ratios.
So on Bitcoin, the average
daily return is 0.2 percent,
whereas the standard deviation
is 4.3 percent,
giving us a daily Sharpe ratio
on Bitcoin of 0.06.
On Ether, the average
return is about
0.6 percent and a standard
deviation of 7.2 percent,
giving us a Sharpe ratio of 0.08.
On Ripple, the average
daily return is
0.5 percent with a standard
deviation of 8.8 percent,
giving us a Sharpe ratio of 0.06,
about the same as Bitcoin.
Now, as a comparison,
the Sharpe ratio on
the S&P 500 is 0.056.
So Bitcoin and Ripple have
about the same Sharpe ratio
as the S&P 500,
and Ether has a slightly
higher Sharpe ratio.
So if we are going to base
our asset allocation on the
Sharpe ratio comparison,
I would say this argues
against investing
in cryptocurrency.
So whereas it's true that
these cryptocurrency
returns are high,
if we look at the risk,
the return per unit standard
deviation is not very high.
So once we take issues of
survivor bias and trading
costs into account,
the Sharpe ratio analysis
argues against investing
in cryptocurrency.
Now, remember as we
discussed in the last class,
we might expect based on
the capital asset pricing model
for the market portfolio to have
the highest Sharpe ratio anyway.
In fact, we do see that
compared to cryptocurrency,
the Sharpe ratio on the S&P
500 does not look so bad,
and basically reflects
the fact that the S&P
500 offers a very good
risk return trade off.
So if we're going to base
the analysis on Sharpe ratio,
perhaps we should not
invest in cryptocurrency.
I would argue though that
we don't want to base
the analysis on the
Sharpe ratio comparison.
Instead, we want to
use another measure.
We should use the Alpha.
What is the Alpha on an asset?
Alpha measures something
called the abnormal return.
To understand abnormal return,
we need to think about
the capital asset pricing model,
which was introduced
in the last lecture.
The capital asset
pricing model is
the most popular theory
in financial markets.
What does it says, is that
for any asset with return R,
the expected return on the asset
equals the risk-free rate plus
the Beta multiplied by
the market risk premium,
namely the expected return on
the market minus
the risk-free rate.
For the risk-free, rate you could
take the treasury bill return.
The market is the return on
the aggregate stock market.
We can consider the S&P 500.
The Beta is the covariance of
the market with R divided by
the variance of the market.
In short, the Beta
measures how much
an asset moves
when the market moves.
Now, the way we can
measure the Beta is
by taking a scatter plot of
the returns on say
Ripple's cryptocurrency
or any cryptocurrency
and on the market.
So here's a scatter plot
where we have points that
correspond to daily returns
on the S&P 500 and on Ripple.
Ripple returns on the y-axis,
S&P 500 returns on the x-axis.
We can see the enormous one-day
Ripple return that we
discussed in Lecture 2.
Based on this, we can see
that there really is not that
much of a relation between
market returns and
Ripple returns.
Mainly, it's one big cloud.
So now let's talk
about the Alpha.
So the Alpha is
the part of the return
that the Capital Asset Pricing
Model does not explain.
That's why we call it
the abnormal returns.
So we take the return that
would be expected return and we
subtract the part of
the return that we
would expect from
the Capital Asset Pricing Model,
that's the normal return.
Now, according to
the Capital Asset Pricing Model,
namely if the theory is true,
all Alphas should be zero.
So in any one sample,
we might measure
a positive Alpha but that
should simply be statistical
noise or survivor bias.
So recall the traditional view
that I mentioned before.
According to the Capital
Asset Pricing Model,
cryptocurrency has no place
in the optimal portfolio.
But let's take
a purely statistical view.
These cryptocurrencies actually
do have positive Alphas.
They do exhibit abnormal returns
on Bitcoin at 0.24 percent,
on Ether at 0.57 percent,
and on Ripple as 0.50 percent.
So these Alphas, these daily
Alphas are actually pretty
high compared to other strategies
that investors pursue.
So which measure should we use?
Alpha or Sharpe ratio?
It makes a difference.
Crypto looks better as an
asset class if we think in
terms of Alpha and I would
argue Alpha is better.
Now, why is Alpha better?
Recall Portfolio Theory.
What portfolio theory
says is that
investors should seek out
the highest Sharpe ratio.
But the highest
Sharpe ratio of what?
The highest Sharpe ratio
of the total portfolio.
The Sharpe ratio is
an intuitive measure of
the trade-off between
risk and return.
It's tempting to use
it for any assets.
But it is not
the most useful measure
when applied asset by asset,
because it does not
take into account
covariance whereas Alpha does.
Crypto, as we saw
with the Ripple plot,
has a low covariance
with the market,
and that makes the returns
more impressive because it can be
used to diversify
the market portfolio.
So in other words,
if we're talking about
a specific asset,
we don't want to look at
the Sharpe ratio which
is the measure for
the overall portfolio,
we want to look at the Alpha.
Now, these are closely related,
because if you have
a high Sharpe ratio portfolio
and if you include
an asset that has a positive
Alpha in that portfolio,
what that does is it
pushes the investment
opportunity set
outward and increases the slope
as shown in this diagram.
So in other words,
the two measures are linked.
What you want is the highest
Sharpe ratio portfolio.
How do you get there?
Well, if you have you start with
the highest Sharpe
ratio portfolio you can
find and then if you
include an asset that
has a positive Alpha,
what that asset does is it will
make your Sharpe ratio
even higher.
So by this discussion,
what should happen is that if you
include cryptocurrency
along with the S&P 500,
you can actually get
a higher Sharpe ratio portfolio
by combining these
cleverly together.
Now, caveats.
It is certainly not
the purpose of this lecture to
advocate for investing
in cryptocurrency,
these are just principles for
how to think about the problem.
Survivor bias, transaction costs,
and risk measurement especially
due to the short sample all might
argue against investing and
taking these expected
returns seriously.
So let's go back to
this issue of covariance.
We see that the return on
the top three cryptocurrencies
has been high.
Now, this may in part reflect
a resolution of the risk
of these currencies,
so in that sense they might be
unlikely to be
repeated, who knows?
But they're still risky.
So there may still be more high
expected returns to come.
But it's hard to measure
expected returns
in a small sample.
Perhaps, we've mismeasured
the expected returns.
However, the covariance
with the market and the
associated Beta is less
likely to be mismeasured.
So the Beta on
cryptocurrencies is about 0.5,
it's not very high.
This Beta is important;
if the Beta is low and
0.5 is a pretty low Beta,
then cryptocurrency
has value as a hedge.
So how can we think
about this Beta?
Well, if we want to really
get to what's driving Beta,
we have to think
about what's driving
the price of cryptocurrency.
So let's for a moment
go with a substance,
a simpler and more
basic benchmark theory
called the Gordon Growth Model.
What the Gordon growth
model says is that,
if an asset pays
dividends that grow
every year at rate g,
and the expected return
on the asset is r,
then the price of
the asset if we take
next years dividend D,
is very simple.
It's D divided by r minus g.
This comes from
an infinite series formula.
Now, strictly speaking,
according to this formula,
crypto's price should be
zero all of the time,
because there's no dividends
to cryptocurrency.
That's the theoretical view
I mentioned before.
However, if Bitcoin
might be useful
someday as a medium of exchange,
then maybe we can think about
the dividend a little
bit differently.
The dividend reflects
the convenience of exchange.
Now, this is not
such a crazy concept.
For example, it is
typical to have
a bank account even
though the rate
paid by a bank is often
below that of
the treasury bill rate and
the treasury bill rate itself
is often below the rate
paid on say AAA corporate bonds
which are very safe.
So it's pretty well
established empirically,
that there's something called
a convenience yield
for cash-like assets.
So one way to think about
this dividend is it's
a convenience yield
should Bitcoin
ever become a cash-like asset.
So if this is the case,
what does the pricing formula
tells us about the covariance?
Well, there are
two offsetting effects.
On the one hand,
the greater economic activity,
the greater the demand
for cash of
all kinds and thus the
greater demand for currency.
Also, both cryptocurrency and
the aggregate market depend
positively on
technological innovation.
Both of these would argue for
positive covariance
and high Betas.
The better the economy does,
the more demand there is likely
to be for cryptocurrency,
and the more likely
crypto will be
used as a medium of exchange.
This should drive up the price.
On the other hand,
when is it likely
that cryptocurrency
would become a medium
of exchange?
Related, when might people really
consider cryptocurrency
as a store of value?
I would argue that the times
when those things might
occur are likely to be times
that are not very good.
They might be times
of disruption,
times of high risk,
times when governments
are not reliable,
namely bad economic times
when the market is doing poorly.
This is going to be what
pushes the covariance
and the Beta
lower thus it is likely that
a Beta of 0.5 reflects
these two forces.
What it means is that
cryptocurrency possibly has
a role on a portfolio
as a hedging security.
Thus to conclude,
cryptocurrency returns
implies Sharpe ratios close
to those of the market.
They have positive Alphas,
abnormal returns,
which suggests that they
are good investment.
No, this does not take into
account survivor bias.
Now, the traditional theory says,
do not hold cryptocurrency
no matter what,
it pays no dividends, it has
no role in the market portfolio.
But traditional theory says,
don't hold money of any kind.
So crypto's role
as a hedge against
bad economic times makes it
intriguing as an investment.
But what's needed is
a quantitative theory of
cryptocurrency to take
this into account.